Add Spring Boot migration course lab guides (#397)
moderneinc/moderne-docs: docs/hands-on-learning/spring-boot-migration/module-2-wave-planning.md

---
sidebar_label: "Module 2: Wave planning"
description: Build LSTs, analyze dependencies, and organize upgrade waves with the Moderne CLI.
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

# Module 2: Wave planning with the Moderne CLI

In this module, you'll move from SaaS-only assessment to CLI-driven analysis so you can map dependencies and pick a safe upgrade order. You will group repositories into “waves” based on those dependencies and upgrade them in order.

> For this workshop, each repository is treated as independently released. That constraint mirrors how large organizations manage shared libraries and it forces us to think about sequencing instead of upgrading everything at once. Dependencies matter because downstream repos can only move once their upstream libraries are upgraded and released. 

Reviewer: We switch pronouns here - from "you" to "us". We should be consistent and use "you" throughout.

> For this workshop, each repository is treated as independently released. That constraint mirrors how large organizations manage shared libraries and it forces us to think about sequencing instead of upgrading everything at once. Dependencies matter because downstream repos can only move once their upstream libraries are upgraded and released. 

Author: Agree. I was trying to avoid "we" as well though...

## Exercise 2-1: Set up your workspace and build LSTs

### Goals for this exercise

* Create a workspace and sync repositories
* Build LSTs for local analysis
* Install a deterministic set of recipes

### Steps

#### Step 1: Set environment variables

Choose paths for your workshop and workspace and set the following environment variables so you can better follow along with the commands. If you want to copy commands directly, you can use these example values, but make sure to create the directories first:

```bash
export WORKSHOP=~/projects/moderne-migration-practice
export WORKSPACE=~/workspaces/migration_workshop
export PROJECTS=~/projects
```

:::tip
You might want to keep two shells open: one in `$WORKSHOP` for scripts and one in `$WORKSPACE` for `mod` commands.
:::

#### Step 2: Sync repos and LSTs

1. First, clone the Moderne Migration Practice workshop which contains some helper scripts and metadata about the example projects.

```bash
mkdir -p $PROJECTS
cd $PROJECTS
git clone https://github.com/modernetraining/moderne-migration-practice
```

> 2. Now you're ready to use the Moderne CLI to clone all of the example projects to your local machine. The `repos.csv` file in the workshop repository has a listing of these example repositories, [as described in the Moderne CLI documentation](../../user-documentation/moderne-cli/references/repos-csv). Feel free to inspect this file to better understand what it contains. The following command will clone all of the listed repositories into your `$WORKSPACE` directory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Now you're ready to use the Moderne CLI to clone all of the example projects to your local machine. The workshop repository includes a `repos.csv` file that lists the example repositories. For more information on this file, [check out our repos.csv documentation](../../user-documentation/moderne-cli/references/repos-csv). Feel free to inspect this file to better understand what it contains. The following command will clone all of the listed repositories into your `$WORKSPACE` directory:
```

```bash
mkdir -p $WORKSPACE
cd $WORKSPACE
mod git sync csv $WORKSPACE $WORKSHOP/repos.csv --with-sources
```

<!-- TODO: Determine if we want to change this command to be  `mod git sync moderne $WORKSPACE --organization "Moderne - Training" --with-sources` instead in order to download the LSTs from the platform. Alternatively, I think we could add the publishUri to our repos.csv file? -->

3. Take a look at the contents of your `$WORKSPACE` folder now. (You can walk through and inspect the directories with `cd` and `ls`, or if you have `tree`, you can see the full structure with `tree -d $WORKSPACE -L 3`.) You should see that you have a directory for the GitHub org (or user) with the repositories inside.

<!-- TODO: If we don't download LSTs from the platform, here's where we need to add a `mod build` step. -->

#### Step 3: Install a deterministic recipe set

Use the following command to install the necessary OpenRewrite recipe modules for this workshop:

```bash

> mod config recipes jar install \

Author: I was thinking that too...I think @mtthwcmpbll was thinking we should tie them to a known-working version so we don't introduce variance. I'm fine either way, but I take your point about needing to update often...

@mtthwcmpbll thoughts?

### Goals for this exercise

* Install the Release-Train-Metro-Plan recipes
* Run a dependency analysis recipe
* Export data tables for wave planning

### Steps

#### Step 1: Install the Release-Train-Metro-Plan recipes

[Merlin’s Release-Train-Metro-Plan project](https://github.com/MBoegers/Release-Train-Metro-Plan) analyzes direct and transitive dependencies to generate a wave map (using a [Jupyter notebook](https://jupyter.org/)). You will use this method to produce a concrete upgrade plan you can follow.

Use the following commands to clone the project (somewhere outside of `$WORKSPACE` such as `$PROJECTS`), build it, and install the recipe artifact locally:

<!-- TODO: Make sure we merge Matt's updates to the Release-Train-Metro-Plan repo that add `pyproject.toml`, etc. -->

```bash
cd $PROJECTS
git clone https://github.com/MBoegers/Release-Train-Metro-Plan.git
cd Release-Train-Metro-Plan
./gradlew clean publishToMavenLocal
mod config recipes jar install dev.mboegie.rewrite:release-train-metro-plan:0.1.0-SNAPSHOT
```

#### Step 2: Extract data from dependency analysis

1. Run the newly-installed recipe on the collection of repositories in your workspace:

> <!-- TODO: If the LSTs didn't download from the platform, this is the first place we'd need to make sure we did a `mod build` manually -->

Reviewer 2: If so, make sure the build is executed in another terminal at the beginning of the module.

```bash
mod run $WORKSPACE --recipe dev.mboegie.rewrite.releasemetro.ReleaseMetroPlan --parallel
```

2. Retrieve the recipe run ID from this run. You'll need it to generate the report in a following step.

```bash

> mod run-history $WORKSPACE

Reviewer 2: we could use `--last-recipe-run` in the study command, but valid to show the run history. If not main intention is showing, use the last recipe run option tp safe time.

3. You'll need to export all of the generated data tables in order to build the report using the following commands:

```bash
mod study $WORKSPACE --last-recipe-run --data-table ParentRelationships
mod study $WORKSPACE --last-recipe-run --data-table ProjectCoordinates
mod study $WORKSPACE --last-recipe-run --data-table UnusedDependencies
mod study $WORKSPACE --last-recipe-run --data-table org.openrewrite.maven.table.DependenciesInUse
```

#### Step 3: Generate the wave map

Choose one of the two options below to generate the wave map, depending on what's available in your environment. 

<Tabs groupId="wave-map">
<TabItem value="cli" label="CLI (uv)" default>

This is the easiest option if you have Python 3+ installed and the `uv` CLI available (or can set it up quickly). Make sure you replace `<recipe_run_id>` with the ID you retrieved in the previous step.

```bash
uv venv
source .venv/bin/activate
uv sync
papermill $PROJECTS/Release-Train-Metro-Plan/src/main/python/ArchitecturalAnalysis.ipynb \
  $PROJECTS/Release-Train-Metro-Plan/src/main/python/ArchitecturalAnalysis_out.ipynb \
  -p workspace $WORKSPACE \
  -p recipe_run <recipe_run_id> \
  --progress-bar \
  --inject-paths

> ```

Reviewer 2: skall we add this to the repo as a script?

Author: I think @mtthwcmpbll added it to the README at least (but I don't know if that got pushed yet?)
